---
sidebar_position: 12
---

# It

We commonly use the pronoun *it* as both a subject and an object pronoun:

- *Don’t drink the milk. **It** smells terrible.*
- *Has anyone seen my phone? I can’t find **it** anywhere.*

We often use *it* in question tags:

- *That furniture is lovely. **It** isn’t too expensive for us, is **it**?*
- *You know the flat with three bedrooms by the supermarket? **It**’s the best one we’ve seen so far, isn’t **it**?*

:::note[See also]

- Tags
- *It*, *this* and *that* in paragraphs

:::

## It as an ‘empty’ or ‘dummy’ subject and object

We can use *it* as an ‘empty’ subject or as an ‘empty’ object. It is ‘empty’ because it doesn’t refer to anything in particular:

- *I know **it**’s going to rain today!*
- ***It****’s getting a bit late now, so let’s watch a DVD at home, shall we?*
- *She doesn’t like **it** when you are so quiet.*
- *How long will **it** be before he gives up smoking?*

## Anticipatory it

We also use *it* to introduce or ‘anticipate’ the subject or object of a sentence, especially when the subject or object of the sentence is a clause. Most commonly, such clauses are *to* + infinitive and *that* clauses. We also call this use of *it* a ‘dummy’ subject, since the real subject is another part of the sentence (real subject underlined):

- ***It’s good*** that she’s doing more exercise*.* (or, more formally: *That she’s doing more exercise is good*.)
- ***It*** *was nice* to talk with them again*.* (or, more formally: *To talk with them again was nice*.)
- ***It****’s quite likely* that we shall be late*, so please do start without us.*

## I find it amazing that …

With verbs such as *find* or *consider*, *it* + adjective + *that* clause or *it* + adjective + *to* infinitive, are commonly used to anticipate an object:

- *I find **it** amazing that they’ve never stopped arguing about football.*
- Not: *~~I find amazing that they’ve~~* …
- *I must say, local people will consider **it** to be an insult that they have not learned to speak a few words of the language.*
- *I find **it** surprising to see so many people here.*

We also use *it* when a clause is the subject of a verb such as *appear, seem, look, occur*, which hedge or soften the statement, making it less direct:

- ***It*** *seems they’ve all lost contact since they met at the wedding.*
- ***It*** *occurred to me that we might visit them while we are in South Africa.*

:::note[See also]

- Hedges (*just*)

:::

## It and cleft sentences (It was my friend who …)

We use *it* in cleft sentences. *It* emphasises the subject or object of the main clause:

- ***It*** *was his sister who ran the marathon in New York, wasn’t it?*
- \[talking about a computer problem\]
- *Was **it** the printer that caused the problem?*
- ***It*** *was Mary they promoted, not Laura.*

:::note[See also]

- Cleft sentences (*It was in June we got married*.)

:::

## It with the passive voice

*It* is common with the passive voice. *It* makes the sentence seem less personal and more objective:

- ***It*** *was decided that we should all swim across the lake before breakfast.*
- ***It*** *is accepted that research into cancer has advanced considerably in the last few years.*

:::note[See also]

- Passive: active and passive

:::
