---
sidebar_position: 08
---

# Nouns and prepositions

Many nouns have particular prepositions which normally follow them. Here are some common examples:

<table><tbody><tr valign="top"><td>nouns</td><td>preposition</td><td>examples</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>age, attempt, point</i></td><td><i>at</i></td><td><i>18 is the </i><b><i>age at</i></b><i> which you are allowed to vote.</i><i>Fisk is making his third </i><b><i>attempt at</i></b><i> the world record.</i></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>need, reason, responsibility</i></td><td><i>for</i></td><td><i>What’s the </i><b><i>reason for</i></b><i> your unhappiness?</i><i>Nobody seems to have </i><b><i>responsibility for</i></b><i> the budget.</i></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>changes, differences, increase</i></td><td><i>in</i></td><td><b><i>Changes in</i></b><i> society have meant that young people leave home earlier.</i><i>There’s been a steady </i><b><i>increase in</i></b><i> the value of the euro.</i></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>inquiry, investigation, research</i></td><td><i>into</i></td><td><i>The police </i><b><i>inquiry into</i></b><i> the theft continues.</i><i>She did some </i><b><i>research into</i></b><i> the causes of back pain.</i></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>cause, example, way</i></td><td><i>of</i></td><td><i>This is an </i><b><i>example of</i></b><i> international collaboration.</i><i>We need to find another </i><b><i>way of</i></b><i> doing things.</i></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>approach, reaction, response</i></td><td><i>to</i></td><td><i>My </i><b><i>reaction to</i></b><i> it all was to try to forget it.</i><i>Her </i><b><i>response to</i></b><i> the criticism was very strong.</i></td></tr></tbody></table>

## Typical errors

These are some of the most typical errors with nouns. A good learner’s dictionary will tell you which prepositions to use after nouns.

<table><tbody><tr valign="top"><td><i>address</i></td><td><i></i><i>Go to our website to get the </i><b><i>address of</i></b><i> your nearest branch.</i>Not: … <s>the address to your nearest branch</s>.<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>advertisement</i></td><td><i></i><i>I saw an </i><b><i>advertisement for</i></b><i> a teaching job in Malawi which looked interesting.</i>Not: … <s>an advertisement of a teaching job</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>awareness</i></td><td><i></i><i>There is a growing </i><b><i>awareness of</i></b><i> the impact of climate change among the young.</i>Not: … <s>a growing awareness about the impact of climate change</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>change</i></td><td><b><i></i></b><b><i>Changes in</i></b><i> our diet have meant that more and more people suffer heart disease.</i> (changes that happen)Not: <s>Changes of our diet</s> …<br/><i>The director of studies must be informed of any </i><b><i>changes</i></b><i> </i><b><i>to</i></b><i> the timetable.</i> (changes that people purposely make)Not: … <s>of any changes in the timetable</s>. (This means changes that happen, not those that people purposely make.)<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>congratulations</i></td><td><b><i></i></b><b><i>Congratulations on</i></b><i> your new job!</i>Not: <s>Congratulations for your new job!</s><s></s></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>course</i></td><td><i></i><i>I’d like to do a </i><b><i>course in</i></b><i> computer programming if I could find a good one.</i>Not: … <s>a course of computer programming</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>exhibition</i></td><td><i></i><i>We went to see an </i><b><i>exhibition of</i></b><i> Viking jewellery.</i>Not: … <s>an exhibition about Viking jewellery</s>.<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>experience</i></td><td><i></i><i>Do you have any previous </i><b><i>experience of</i></b><i> working with children?</i>(usually followed by the <i>-ing</i> form of a verb)Not: … <s>previous experience in working with children?</s><br/><i>She has ten years’ </i><b><i>experience in</i></b><i> television and radio.</i> (usually followed by a noun)Not: … <s>ten years’ experience on television and radio</s>.<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>increase</i><i>decrease</i><i>growth</i></td><td><i></i><i>There has been an </i><b><i>increase of</i></b><i> 200,000 </i><b><i>in</i></b><i> the city’s population in the last ten years.</i>(<i>Of</i> is used before numbers and quantities after <i>increase/decrease/growth</i>; <i>in</i> is used before the thing affected by the change.)Not: … <s>an increase of the city’s population</s> …(Compare <i>change in</i>, above.)<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>information</i></td><td><i></i><i>Can you give us some </i><b><i>information</i></b><i> </i><b><i>on/about</i></b><i> bus tours, please?</i>Not: … <s>some information of bus tours</s> …?<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>interest</i></td><td><i></i><i>He seems to have less </i><b><i>interest in</i></b><i> everything these days.</i>Not: … <s>less interest to everything these days</s>.<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>invitation</i></td><td><i></i><i>The </i><b><i>invitation to</i></b><i> the reception at the embassy arrived the next day.</i>Not: <s>The invitation of the reception</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>knowledge</i></td><td><i></i><i>For this job you need some </i><b><i>knowledge of</i></b><i> Portuguese.</i>Not: <s>… some knowledge in Portuguese</s>.<br/><i>He has an amazing </i><b><i>knowledge of</i></b><i> European history.</i>Not: … <s>an amazing knowledge about European history</s>.<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>lesson</i></td><td><i></i><i>I need some </i><b><i>lessons in</i></b><i> how to set up a website.</i>Not: <s>I need some lessons of how to</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>member</i></td><td><i></i><i>Can anyone become a </i><b><i>member of</i></b><i> your book club?</i>Not: … <s>a member in your book club?</s><s></s></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>method</i></td><td><i></i><i>Questionnaires are not necessarily the best </i><b><i>method of</i></b><i> collecting sociological data.</i>Not: … <s>the best method to collect</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>need</i></td><td><i></i><i>We understand the </i><b><i>need for</i></b><i> change but we should move slowly.</i>Not: … <s>the need of change</s> …<i>(Of</i> is used with <i>need</i> in the expression <i>in need of</i>:<i>The village is </i><b><i>in need of</i></b><i> a community centre where people, especially young people, can go in the evenings.)</i><i></i></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>newcomer</i></td><td><i></i><i>I was a </i><b><i>newcomer to</i></b><i> windsurfing so I was very nervous.</i>Not: <s>I was a newcomer of windsurfing</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>place</i></td><td><i></i><i>I’d love to show you some of the nice </i><b><i>places in</i></b><i> my hometown.</i>Not: … <s>the nice places of my hometown</s>.<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>possibility</i></td><td><i></i><i>The </i><b><i>possibility of</i></b><i> making contact with other intelligent beings in the universe is very small.</i>Not: <s>The possibility to make contact</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>problem</i></td><td><i></i><i>The </i><b><i>problem of</i></b><i> finding a good babysitter is one that many parents have faced.</i>Not: <s>The problem to find</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>reason</i></td><td><i></i><i>I’ve never understood the </i><b><i>reason for</i></b><i> all these different forms we have to fill in.</i>Not: … <s>the reason of all</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>risk</i></td><td><i></i><i>We all know the </i><b><i>risks of</i></b><i> getting a virus if we don’t protect our computer.</i>Not: … <s>the risks for getting a virus</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>translation</i></td><td><i></i><i>She did a </i><b><i>translation into</i></b><i> English of some ancient Chinese poems.</i>Not: … <s>a translation in English</s> …<br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>visit</i></td><td><i></i><i>The </i><b><i>visit to</i></b><i> the temple was the high point of the holiday.</i>Not: <s>The visit in the temple</s> …<br/></td></tr></tbody></table>
