---
sidebar_position: 14
---

# When

*When* is a *wh*\-word. We use *when* to ask questions, as a conjunction and to introduce relative clauses.

## When as a question word

We can use *when* to ask for information about what time something happens:

- ***When*** *did you leave?*
- ***When*** *are you going on holiday?*
- ***When*** *will you know the result of the exam?*

We can use *when* in indirect questions:

- *She asked me **when** I would be ready to start the job.*
- *I wonder **when** the new computers will arrive.*

:::note[See also]

- Questions
- Questions: *wh-*questions
- Future

:::

## When as a conjunction

We use *when* as a conjunction meaning ‘at the time that’. The clause with *when* is a subordinate clause (sc) and needs a main clause (mc) to complete its meaning. If the *when*\-clause comes before the main clause, we use a comma.

### Talking about the past

- *\[SC\] **When I was young**, \[MC\] there were no houses here.*
- *\[MC\] Nobody spoke \[SC\]* ***when she came into the room.***

### Talking about the present

- ***When*** *you start the engine, there’s a strange noise.*

### Talking about the future

In references to the future with *when*, we use the present simple or the present perfect in the *when*\-clause, not the future with *shall* and *will*:

- ***When*** *the new park **opens**, I’ll go there every day.*
- Not: *~~When the new park will open, I’ll go there every day.~~*
- ***When*** *I**’ve*** ***finished** my homework, I’m going to phone Marita.*
- Not: *~~When I’ll finish my homework, I’m going to phone Marita.~~*

We can use *when* as a conjunction to mean ‘considering that’:

- *What’s the point in going out **when** we have to be home by eleven o’clock?*

:::note[See also]

- Conjunctions
- Punctuation
- *As*

:::

## When as a relative pronoun

We can use *when* as a relative pronoun in relative clauses:

- *That was the week **when** we booked our holiday.*
- *The parcel arrived in the post at 11 am, **when** I was still at work.*

:::note[See also]

- Relative clauses

:::

## Since when?

We can use *since when* to ask at what time something began. We often use it as a response when we are surprised that something has begun:

- A: *Hilary’s working at the Art Museum now*.
- B: *Really? **Since when**?*
- A: *Oh, she’s been there about three months*.

:::warning

Using *Since when* at the start of a question can express anger or sarcasm:

- \[talking about children watching television\]
- A: *Maybe you should try not to let them watch so much television*.
- B: ***Since when*** *are you an expert on childcare?* (This is very direct.)

## When or if?

We use *when* to refer to a future situation or condition that we are certain of, whereas we use *if* to introduce a possible or unreal situation.

:::

Compare

<table><tbody><tr valign="top"><td><b><i>When </i></b><i>I see Gary, I’ll tell him that you said hello.</i></td><td>I will definitely see Gary.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><b><i>If</i></b><i> I see Gary, I’ll tell him that you said hello.</i></td><td>I may see Gary but I am not certain.</td></tr></tbody></table>

:::note[See also]

- *If* or *when*?

:::

## When or since?

We use *when* to mean ‘(at) the time that’. We use *since* to refer to a particular time in the past until another time or until now:

- *I had a great time **when** I went to the coast.*
- *I have been having a boring time **since** I came back home.*
- Not: *~~I have been having a boring time when I came back home~~*.

:::note[See also]

- *Since*

:::

## When: typical errors

Be careful not to use *when* instead of *if*:

- ***If*** *you arrive too late, you are not allowed to take the examination because they don’t accept late enrolment.*
- Not: *~~When you arrive too late~~*, …

Be careful not to use *when* instead of *since*:

- *I was very surprised to see him because it’s been a long time **since** I last saw him.*
- Not: … ~~it’s been a long time when I last saw him~~.

We don’t use *will* after *when* to mean ‘at that time’:

- ***When*** *I **start** college, I’ll miss my old school friends.*
- Not: *~~When I’ll start college, I’ll miss my old school friends~~*.
