---
sidebar_position: 12
---

# If

*If* is a conjunction.

## If: conditions

We often use *if* to introduce possible or impossible situations or conditions and their results. The situations or conditions can be real, imagined or uncertain:

- *I usually make a sandwich to take to work **if** I have enough time.* (real)
- ***If*** *you don’t book now, you won’t get good tickets.* (real)
- *They’d have got the job done quicker **if** they’d had more people working on it.* (imagined)
- *Will you bring my glasses down **if** you go upstairs?* (uncertain)

:::note[See also]

- Conditionals: *if*

:::

## If possible, if necessary

We can sometimes leave words out after *if* to form fixed expressions:

- *Check the temperature of your meat with a meat thermometer **if possible**.* (if it’s possible or if that’s possible)
- *Interest rates would have to rise **if necessary** to protect the pound, Mr John Smith, Shadow Chancellor, indicated yesterday on BBC TV’s Money Programme.*

## If so, if not

We use *so* or *not* after *if* when it is obvious what we are referring to:

- \[from a job advertisement\]
- *Are you looking for part-time work? Do you want to work from home? **If so**, read on.*
- (if you are looking for part-time work or if you want to work from home)

- *You should all have received your booklist for the course by now. **If not**, please email the office.*
- (if you haven’t received your booklist for the course by now)

- *I’ll see you soon, definitely at the wedding, **if not** before.*
- (if I don’t see you before the wedding)

## Even if

We can use *even if* to mean *if* when talking about surprising or extreme situations:

- *You’re still going to be cold **even if** you put on two or three jumpers.*

:::note[See also]

- *Even*

:::

## If: reporting questions

We use *if* to introduce reported *yes-no* questions and questions with *or*.

Compare

<table><tbody><tr valign="top"><td>direct question</td><td>indirect question</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>Do you like dogs?</i></td><td><i>I asked </i><b><i>if</i></b><i> she liked dogs.</i></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>Are you leaving now or are you staying for a bit longer?</i></td><td><i>He asked </i><b><i>if I</i></b><i> was leaving now or staying for a bit longer.</i></td></tr></tbody></table>

:::note[See also]

- Conditionals
- *If* or *when*?
- *If* or *whether*?
- Reported speech
- *Even if*

:::

We use *only if* to express a strong condition, often an order or command, to mean ‘on the condition that’. It has an opposite meaning to ‘except if’:

- *Payment will be made **only if** the work is completed on time.*
- *Alright I’ll come but **only if** I can bring a friend with me.*

We often separate *only* and *if*, using *only* in the main clause:

- *He’ll **only** take the job **if** they offer him more money.*
- *We’ll **only** achieve our targets **if** everyone works together.*

## If and politeness

In speaking, we often use *if* to introduce a polite request. *If* is usually followed by modal verbs *will, would, can* or *could* when it is used to be polite:

- ***If*** *you’ll just tell Julie that her next client is here.* (Can you tell Julie that …)
- ***If*** *you would like to follow me.* (Please follow me.)

:::note[See also]

- Conditionals
- Politeness

:::
