---
sidebar_position: 13
---

# By

*By* is a preposition or an adverb.

## By and time

We use *by* meaning ‘not later than’ to refer to arrangements and deadlines:

- *They said that the plumber would be here **by Monday**.*
- *The postman is always here by **11 am**.*

We use *by the time*, meaning ‘when’, to connect an action that has happened or will have happened before a second action. The action that happened second comes after *by the time*:

- ***By the time*** *\[action 2\] you wake up, \[action 1\] I’ll have finished work!* (When you wake up, I will have finished work)
- Not: *~~By the time you will wake up~~* …
- *Unfortunately the man had died **by the time** the ambulance arrived.* (When the ambulance arrived, the man had already died.)

:::note[See also]

- *Before*, *by*, *till*, *until*

:::

## By and the passive

When we use the passive voice, we can use a phrase with *by* to say who did the action:

- *The new street was opened **by the Mayor**.*
- *The wedding cake was made **by Henry’s mother**.*

:::note[See also]

- Passives with an agent
- Passives without an agent

:::

## By meaning ‘how to do something’

We use *by* + *\-ing* form to describe how to do something:

- ***By pressing*** *this button, you turn on the alarm system. Then **by entering** the code 0089, you can turn it off again.*

We use *by* + noun to describe how someone travels or communicates, or how things are processed:

- *I’ll send it **by email**; I can send it **by post** as well if you wish.*
- *Can I pay* ***by credit card?***

We say *by car, by bus, by plane*, etc. but if there is a determiner (e.g. *a/an, the, some, my, his*) before the noun, we say *in* or *on*.

Compare

<table><tbody><tr valign="top"><td><i>We went </i><b><i>by train</i></b><i> to Pisa.</i><i>It’s easier to get there </i><b><i>by car</i></b><i>.</i><i>Did you travel </i><b><i>by plane</i></b><i>?</i></td><td><i>by</i> + mode of transport</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>I’ll have to go </i><b><i>on the 5 am train</i></b><i>.</i><i>Barbara is travelling </i><b><i>in Ann’s car</i></b><i>.</i><i>Have you ever travelled </i><b><i>in a small plane</i></b><i>?</i></td><td><i>on/in</i> + determiner + mode of transport</td></tr></tbody></table>

:::warning

When we walk, we say *on foot*:

- *It takes me just 20 minutes to get to work **on foot**.*
- Not: … ~~to get to work by foot.~~

:::

## By \+ myself etc

When we say *by* + *myself*, *yourself*, *himself*, *herself*, *itself*, *oneself*, *ourselves*, *yourselves*, *themselves*, it means ‘alone’. We sometimes use *all* for emphasis:

- *They painted the whole house **by themselves**!* (They did it alone.)
- *I was **all by myself** in the house last night but I didn’t mind.* (I was alone.)
- *Did you build that castle **all by yourself**?* (Did you do it alone?)

:::note[See also]

- Pronouns: reflexive (*myself*, *themselves*, etc.)

:::

## By and place

We use *by* to mean ‘beside’ or ‘at the side of’:

- *There’s a lovely café **by** the river. We could go there.* (The café is beside the river.)

*By* and *near* have a similar meaning but *by* refers to a shorter distance:

Compare

<table><tbody><tr valign="top"><td><i>I live </i><b><i>by</i></b><i> a football stadium.</i></td><td>The stadium is beside my house.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td><i>I live </i><b><i>near</i></b><i> a football stadium.</i></td><td>The stadium is in my neighbourhood.</td></tr></tbody></table>

We also use *by* to mean ‘movement past something’:

- *Three people walked **by** the house as Henry opened the door.* (They walked past the house.)

*By* as an adverb is often used in this sense:

- *Lisa waved as she went **by**.* (She passed the house without stopping.)

## By and measurements and amounts

We use *by* to talk about measurements, and increases and decreases in amounts:

- *My bedroom is just three metres **by** two metres!* (three metres in one direction and two metres in the other direction)
- *When you work part-time, you are usually paid **by** the hour.*
- *The price of fuel has increased **by** 12% this year.*

## By meaning ‘during’

We sometimes use *by* + *day* and *by* + *night* to mean ‘during the day or the night’:

- *He works **by night** and sleeps **by day**.*

## By meaning ‘written’ or ‘composed’

We use *by* when we talk about the writers of books, songs, poems, symphonies, etc.:

- *What’s the name of the latest song **by** U2?*
- *This website makes works **by** Beethoven available free for downloading.*

You will find other meanings of *by* in a good learner’s dictionary.

## By: typical errors

We say *by car, by bus, by plane* etc. but if there is a determiner (e.g. *a/an, the, some, his*), we say *in* or *on*:

- *They always travel **on** the bus.*
- Not: … ~~by the bus.~~

We use *by*, not *with*, to talk about the action of something:

- *He got into the house **by breaking** the window.* (action)
- Not: … ~~with breaking the window.~~

We use *with*, not *by*, to refer to the object or instrument that we use to do something!

- *He broke the window **with a rock**.* (object/instrument)
- Not: … ~~by a rock.~~
